\documentclass[11pt]{article}

\usepackage{graphicx}
%\usepackage{algorithmic}
%\usepackage{algorithm}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{enumerate}
\usepackage[mathscr]{euscript}

\begin{document}

\pagenumbering{arabic}

\begin{center}
{\LARGE{\textbf{Computational Theories of Collaboration}}} \\
\Large\textsc{Ph.D. Comprehensive Exam} \\[1em]
\large\textnormal{Mohammad Shayganfar - mshayganfar@wpi.edu} \\
\large\textnormal{May, 26 2015}
\end{center}

\section{Introduction to Collaboration Theories}

To be collaborative, partners, e.g., a robot and a human, need to meet the
specifications stipulated by some theories that we review in this document. As
we discuss in Section \ref{sec:sharedplans}, collborators need to commit to the
group activity and to their role in it; they need to divide the task load
according to their capabilities so they can carry out the individual plans that
constitute the group activity; and they need to commit to the success of others.
Collaborators also need to be able to communicate with others effectively, and
to interpret others' actions and utterances in the collaboration context.
Furthermore, collaborators need to be willing to help others in doing their own
tasks, and to reconcile between commitments to existing collabortion and their
other activities \cite{grosz:mice-menus}.

Collaboration is a special type of coordinated activity in which the
participants work jointly, together performing a task or carrying out the
activities needed to satisfy a shared goal \cite{grosz:collaboration}.

Existing collaboration theories (including SharedPlans) consider the nature of a
collaboration to be more than a set of individual acts. These theories argue for
an essential distinction between a collaboration and a simple interaction or
even a coordination in terms of commitments \cite{grosz:shared-plans,
lochbaum:collaborative-planning}.

\section{Computational Theories of Collaboration}

There are prominent collaboration theories that are mostly based on plans and
often analysis of the discourse between collaborators revolving around these
plans \cite{grosz:plans-discourse, Litman:discourse-commonsense}. In these
theories the discourse analysis is based on search over these tree plans
\cite{rich:discourse}.

\subsection{Theory of Joint Intentions/Teamwork}

There are also some other theories with similarities and contrasts conveying
collaboration concepts including Cohen and Levesque's work describing the
concept of \textit{joint intentions} in \cite{cohen:teamwork,
levesque:acting-together}.

\subsection{SharedPlans Theory}
\label{sec:sharedplans}

\subsubsection{Communicating Intentions}

Using discourse plans can help to encode the knowledge about conversation.

In \cite{grosz:plans-discourse}, Grosz and Sidner argue that the components of
the discourse structure are a trichotomy of linguistic structure, intentions
structure and the attention state. In their work, the linguistic structure of a
discourse is a sequence of utterances aggregating into discourse segments just
as the words in a single sentence form constituent phrases. They also discuss
the idea of the discourse purpose as the intention that underlies engagement in
the particular discourse. They believe this intention is the reason behind
performing a discourse rather than some other actions, and also the reason
behind conveying a particular content of the discourse rather than some other
contents. They describe mechanisms for plan analysis looking at Discourse
Segment Purposes (DSPs). In fact, the DSPs specify how the discourse segments
contribute to achieving the overall discourse purpose. Finally, the third
component in their theory, the attentional state, provides an abstraction of the
agent's focus of attention as the discourse unfolds. The focusing structure
contains DSPs and the stacking of focus spaces reflects the relative salience of
the entities in each space during the discourse. In short, the focusing
structure is the central repository for the contextual content required for
processing utterances during the discourse \cite{grosz:plans-discourse}.

\subsubsection{SharedPLans}

Grosz and Sidner \cite{grosz:plans-discourse}
Grosz and Kraus \cite{grosz:collaboration}

The SharedPlans model of collaborative action \cite{grosz:planning-acting}
\cite{grosz:collaboration} \cite{grosz:plans-discourse} aims to provide the
theoretical foundations needed for building collaborative robots/ agents
\cite{grosz:collaborative-systems}. It specifies four key characteristics for
participants in a group activity to be collaborative partners, and thus for
their joint activity to be collaborative. The SharedPlans definition states that
for a group activity to be collaborative, the collaborators must have:

\begin{enumerate}[a)]
  \item intentions that the group perform the group activity;
  \item mutual belief of a recipe;
  \item individual or group plans for the constituent subactions of the recipe;
  \item intentions that their collaborators succeed in doing the constituent
  subactions.
\end{enumerate}
 
The intentions that this definition specifies constitute different kinds of
commitments required of the collaborators. Mutual belief of the recipe
essentially means that all the collaborators hold the same beliefs about the way
in which the activity will be accomplished. Therefore, the collaborators must
agree on how to do the activity. The definition of the overall plan in terms of
constituent plans of individuals or groups is recursive, with the recursion
ending at the level of basic, individual actions \cite{grosz:mice-menus}.

Grosz, Sidner and Lochbaum in \cite{grosz:plans-discourse} and
\cite{lochbaum:plan-models} present a model of plans to account for how agents
with partial knowledge collaborate in the construction of a domain plan. Agents
have a library of partially speci ed plan schemas (recipes). These recipes might
be underspeci ed as to how an action is executed or how an action contributes to
a goal. Agents then collaborate in constructing a shared plan by uttering
statements about their beliefs and intentions about the plan. This collaboration
will terminate with each agent mutually believing that each act in the plan can
be executed by one of the agents, that that agent intends to perform the act,
and that each act in the plan contributes to the goal.


\textit{Shared plan} is another essential concept in the collaboration context.
The definition of the shared plan is derived from the definition of plans
Pollack introduced in \cite{pollack:plan-inference,
pollack:plan-mental-attitudes} since it rests on a detailed treatment of the
relations among actions and it distinguishes the intentions and beliefs of an
agent about those actions. However, since Pollack's plan model is just a simple
plan of a single agent, Grosz and Sidner extended that to plans of two or more
collaborative agents. The concept of the shared plan provides a framework in
which to further evaluate and explore the roles that particular beliefs and
intentions play in collaborative activity \cite{lochbaum:plan-models}. However,
this formulation of shared plans (a) could only deal with activities that
directly decomposed into single-agent actions, (b) did not address the
requirement for the commitment of the agents to their joint activities, and (c)
did not adequately deal with agents having partial recipes
\cite{grosz:collaboration}. Grosz and Kraus in \cite{grosz:collaboration},
reformulate Pollack's definition of the individual plans
\cite{pollack:plan-mental-attitudes}, and also revise and expand the SharedPlans
to address these shortcomings.

\subsection{``Hybrid" Collaboration Approaches}

Tambe's work on \textit{STEAM teamwork model} \cite{tambe:flexible-teamwork}.

\section{Relation to Psychology and Sociology}

Referring expressions \cite{heeman:model-collaboration-referring}

\section{Similarities and Differences}

\section{Application in Human-Computer Collaboration}

In \cite{heeman:model-collaboration-referring} Heeman presents a computational
model of how a conversational participant collaborates in order to make a
referring action successful. The model is based on the view of language as
goal-directed behaviour, and in his work, he refers to SharedPlans as part of
the planning and conversation literature.


There are many research focusing
on different aspects of collaboration each of which are different than my own
work. In my thesis, I focus on emotion functions and how they impact
collaboration's structure and processes, and how the dynamics of the
collaboration structure influences emotion-regulated processes. Some of the
other works focus on the concepts of robot assistants
\cite{clancey:agent-assistants-collaboration}, or teamwork and its challenges in
cognitive and behavioral levels \cite{cohen:teamwork,
nikolaidis:collaboration-joint-action, scerri:prototype-distributed-teams,
tambe:flexible-teamwork}. Some researchers have an overall look at a
collaboration concept at the architectural level. In
\cite{garcia:collaboration-emotional-awareness} authors present a collaborative
architecture, COCHI, to support the concept of emotional awareness. In
\cite{esau:integrating-emotion-collaboration} authors present the integration of
emotional competence into a cognitive architecture which runs on a robot, MEXI.
In \cite{sofge:collaboration-humanoid-space} authors discuss the challenges of
integrating natural language, gesture understanding and spatial reasoning of a
collaborative humanoid robot situated in the space. The importance of
communication during collaboration has been considered by some researchers from
human-computer interaction and human-robot collaboration
\cite{clair:action-intention-collaboraiton,
matignon:verbal-nonverbal-collaboration, rich:discourse} to theories describing
collaborative negotiation, and discourse planning and structures
\cite{andriessen:disourse-planning, grosz:discourse-structure,
sidner:discourse-collaborative-negotiation}. There are other concepts such as
joint actions and commitments \cite{grosz:intention-dynamics-collaboration},
dynamics of intentions during collaboration \cite{levesque:acting-together}, and
task-based planning providing more depth in the context of collaboration
\cite{burghart:cognitive-architecture-robot, rich:cea}.

The concept of collaboration has also received attention in the industry and in
research in robotic laboratories \cite{green:collaboration-literature-review}.

\section{Conclusion}

\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{mshayganfar}

\end{document}
